>> Sreenivasan: SCIENTISTS ARE
PREDICTING A 110-MILE SHEET OF
ICE-- A CHUNK THE SIZE OF THE
STATE OF DELAWARE-- WILL BREAK
OFF ANTARCTICA IN THE COMING
DAYS OR WEEKS.
THE CAUSE IS WARMING OCEAN
WATERS, AND THE ICE MELT HAS
IMPLICATIONS FOR SEA LEVEL RISE
WELL BEYOND THE SOUTH POLE
REGION.
THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC JULY
ISSUE COVER STORY IS CALLED
"ANTARCTICA IS MELTING, AND
GIANT ICE CRACKS ARE JUST THE
START."
JOINING ME NOW FROM BIRMINGHAM,
ALABAMA, TO DISCUSS THIS IS
ROBERT KUNZIG, THE SENIOR
ENVIRONMENT EDITOR FOR "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC."
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL A CHUNK OF ICE THE
SIZE OF DELAWARE SEEMS ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE TO PUT OUR HEADS
AROUND, BUT THAT'S ACTUALLY A
SMALL PIECE WHEN YOU THINK OF
THE SIZE OF ANTARCTICA.
>> YES, IT IS AND IT'S EVEN JUST
A SMALL PIECE, HARI, OF THE
LARSEN SEA ICE SHELF THAT
IT'S BREAKING OFF OF.
THE LARSEN SEA IS A FLOATING
SLAB OF ICE THE SIZE OF VERMONT
AND NEW HAMPSHIRE COMBINED AND
WHAT'S HAPPENING IS A RIFT THAT
HAS BEEN GROWING YEARS NOW,
THIS YEAR REALLY ACCELERATED.
AS YOU SAID, IT'S ABOUT 15
MILES WIDE, IT... AND IT'S BEEN
GROWING FROM SOUTH TO NORTH.
BASICALLY GOING TO SLICE A BIG
CHUNK OF ICE OFF THE ICE SHELF
AND THAT CHUNK WILL BE THE SIZE
OF DELAWARE.
>> WE HAVE A PICTURE OF ONE OF
THE CRACKS THAT ARE GOING
THROUGH.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN LOOKING
AND STUDYING AND TRYING TO GET
AT SOME OF THESE CRACKS FOR A
LONG TIME.
HOW DEEP DOES IT GO DOWN AND
WHY ARE THEY SO CONCERNED?
>> THE CRACK IN LARSEN SEA,
WHERE LARSEN SEA MEETS THE SEA,
IT'S ABOUT 600 FEET THICK.
AND MOST OF THAT IS UNDER WATER.
SO THERE'S AN ICE CLIFF OF ABOUT
60 FEET THAT TOWERS ABOVE THE
WAVES.
SO THE CRACK GOES ABOUT AT
LEAST 600 FEET.
IF THIS ICEBERG GOES, THE WORRY
IS THAT THE WHOLE ICE SHELF
MIGHT COLLAPSE AS OTHER ICE
SHELVES ON THE ANTARTICA
PENINSULA HAVE ALREADY
COLLAPSED.
ICE SHELVES THERE AND ELSEWHERE
ARE REALLY KIND OF CANARIES IN
THE COAL MINE, THEY'RE A SIGN OF
WHAT'S HAPPENING ALL OVER, THAT
ANTARTICA IS MELTING FASTER THAN
SCIENTISTS HAD EXPECTED.
>> THIS ISN'T JUST ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE ICE IS ALREADY IN
THE WATER AND IT'S JUST MELTING
IN A GLASS OF WATER, WE'RE
ACTUALLY ADDING NEW ICE CUBES TO
THAT GLASS, WHICH IS WHAT MAKES
THE SEA LEVEL RISE?
>> WELL, YES.
THAT'S THE PERFECT ANALOGY.
THIS ICE, THE LARSON SEA ICE
SHELF IS FLOATING, IT IS LIKE AN
ICE CUBE IN A GLASS OF WATER.
EVEN IF ALL OF IT COLLAPSES,
THAT, ITSELF, DOES NOT ADD TO
SEA LEVEL.
BUT THE THING ABOUT ICE SHELVES
IS THAT THEY FUNCTION LIKE
CORKS, THEY'RE BOTTLING UP A
MUCH LARGER AMOUNT ICE THAT'S ON
THE GROUND, ON THE LAND, IN THIS
CASE, BEHIND THEM.
AND WHEN... THAT'S THE GLACIERS
THAT ARE CARRYING ICE FROM THE
INTERIOR OF ANTARTICA TOWARDS
THE SEA.
THE ICE SHELVES ARE SORT OF THE
FLOATING ENDS OF THE GLACIERS.
AND SO WHEN THAT FLOW INCREASES,
MORE ICE IS FALLING INTO THE SEA
AND RAISING SEA LEVEL.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE ARTICLE
IT TALKS ABOUT HOW SCIENTISTS
MEASURE WHAT'S HAPPENING UNDER
WATER.
WHAT'S HAPPENING UNDERNEATH
THESE ICE SHEETS?
HOW IS THERE WARMER WATER AND
WHAT'S THE INTERACTION OF SALT
WATER DO TO THIS ALL?
>> THE BIG THING IN RECENT YEARS
IS THAT WARMER OCEAN WATER, AND
WHEN I SAY WARM, WARMER, I DON'T
MEAN REALLY WARM.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT FOUR, FIVE
DEGREES ABOVE FREEZING.
THAT WATER IS PENETRATING
FURTHER UP TOWARDS THE COAST OF
ANTARTICA UNDER THE ICE SHELVES
AND IT IS UNDERMINING THE ICE
SHELVES, IT'S MELTING THEM AND
THINNING THEM FROM BELOW AND
WEAKENING THEM.
>> YOU HAVE A LARGE MAP THAT
YOU HAVE IN THE NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC ARTICLE THAT PUTS
THIS IN PERSPECTIVE AND THERE'S
AREAS OF KIND OF PURPLE THAT ARE
THE AREAS THAT ARE KIND OF
FLOATING OFF.
THERE'S A COUPLE OF PATCHES OF
RED. WHERE IT'S REALLY
HAPPENING AT AN INCREDIBLE RATE.
TELL US ABOUT HOW FAST IT'S
HAPPENING IN, SAY, THE PINE
GLACIER.
>> IT'S BEEN AN ACCELERATION
SEVERAL TIMES, ALL OVER
ANTARTICA, THE LOSS OF ICE FROM
THE FLOATING ICE SHELVES HAS
INCREASED BY A FACTOR OF 12 IN
THE PAST TWO DECADES.
SO WHERE IN THE MID '90s THEY
WERE LOSING SIX BILLION TONS OF
ICE, NOW THEY'RE LOSING 74.
IT'S NATURAL FOR THESE GLACIERS
TO FLOAT IN THE SEA.
BUT WHAT'S HAPPENING IS THE
SPEED HAS INCREASED.
>> Sreenivasan: ROBERT KUNZIG,
THE SENIOR ENVIRONMENT EDITOR
FOR "NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC,"
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.